The impact of World War I and World War II affected the whole world as it involved many of the world’s biggest powers at the time and revolved around politics. Despite these similarities, the two wars were distinct conflicts in ways such as the differing causes, nature of the wars, and their outcomes. While World War I was the result of the cultural and diplomatic tensions of the early 20th century, World War II was driven by Nazi Germany's aggressive expansionism and anti-Semitism. The nature of the two wars differed, with World War II having the use of new destructive technology new technology and the dehumanization of the enemy. The outcome of the wars also was different as in World War I, with the Treaty of Versailles and the creation of the League of were a result of the war in comparison to how Germany was split after World War II. It is important to look at these differences and to define how these conflicts are different through lenses such as culture, totalitarianism, and social constructs to learn the impact of these wars and to take away lessons from them.
          	One of the differences that makes these two distinct conflicts is the differing causes of the two wars. In World War I, we learned from the July Crisis Simulation how many of the countries in Europe were before the war with their relations to each other in the aftermath of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand. What I learned from this specifically how the culture of diplomacy was in the early 20th century of Europe and how many of the nations of Europe at the time had their own allies and reasons to make decisions to protect their own country. Many nations had prior conflicts with other nations such as France and Germany having conflicts prior to World War 1 (Moser, 2019) or Bulgaria and Serbia in the second Balkan war that all impacted their relations (Moser, 2019). This led many nations to come together on either supporting Serbia or Austria-Hungary in the arising conflict which was like what really happened. I think a big takeaway from this is how even though many countries do not want to go to war, they will back up their allies to protect what they think is important.
          	 In comparison the causes of World War II were mostly due to Nazi Germany’s aggressive actions such as invading Poland which was to expand territory and influence through military force and anti-Semitism. From the second focus group and in class, we talked about how once the Nazi Party came to power, they looked to expand their territory after losing a lot after World War I. My focus group looked at Poland and in focus group update 3, I found evidence that showed the prevalence of anti-Semitism in Poland when the Nazi’s expanded (McGetchin, 2017). Along with this, in the Fundamentals assignment about Anti-Semitism, it showed how in society this was a big issue which is why it was one of the main causes (iWitness, 2023). The main takeaway is that due to the totalitarian Nazi Party forcing ideas onto the people of Germany and the territory it aimed to gain, it let to more anti-Semitism throughout Europe. If there was less control from the Nazi party, they would have had less influence on the people to spread ideas of hate.
          	Someone who would challenge that this is one way that the wars are two distinct conflicts is by saying that the wars were due to the poor economic conditions of most of the countries in Europe. In The Road to Wigan Pier, George Orwell looks at what can be done to improve the lives of the working-class families he encountered on his travels through industrial towns and mining communities. He begins by acknowledging the many difficulties faced by these families, including poverty, unemployment, and poor living conditions (Orwell, 1937). He notes that while some people argue that poverty and suffering are inevitable consequences of capitalism, others believe that these problems can be solved through socialism. A takeaway from this is that the changing political atmosphere at this time also led to these wars as many new governments were coming to power in these countries such as Germany and Italy and that many countries before both wars were not in a good place economically which could show that it was one long reason for conflict. Overall, these conflicts are considered two distinct conflicts based on the causes of the two wars, even though there are some challenges to saying that they are two distinct conflicts.
          	Another difference that makes the two conflicts distinct is the nature of the war. In class during Great Britain’s focus group 2 update, they talked about how technology advanced in between World War I and World War II (Britain, 2023).  Machine guns, artillery, and poison gas were some of the new weapons and technologies that were made available, making it easier to murder more people than ever before in the first World War (Travers, 2011). The industrialization made it simple to dehumanize the enemy, while trench soldiers faced a constant risk of death. The interaction of nationalism and industrialization altered the experiences of soldiers in the trenches (Travers, 2011). Nationalism gave warriors a feeling of meaning and identity, but it also made the opponent less human. This was one reason how each nation’s culture was affected through nationalism. Culture played a big part in influencing the beliefs, attitude and actions of individuals and societies during these conflicts which led to the destruction alongside technology in both wars. In comparison to this, in the Second World War there was also new technology. There were significant advancements such as airplanes, tanks, and new gases which were devastating when used. In the Essay by David French, named “The Real War”, it talks about how deadly World War II was through these new technologies causing more people to be killed (French, 2011).  My takeaway from the difference between the nature of the two wars is how the culture and nationalism of a country can led to more death and destruction. If countries didn’t have strong feelings for their own country and shared a culture, they would have seen the enemy as humans and not wanted to kill them. Along with this the advancement in technology led to more death and destruction as well and if this advancement didn’t happen then there would have been less casualties in the war.
          	The final difference that makes the conflicts distinct is the outcome of the war. In the aftermath of World War I, the Treaty of Versailles had a big impact that affected Germany and some other countries. In the Treaty of Versailles simulation that we did, we learned how after the war there were a lot of restrictions put on Germany. In the simulation, I was Czechoslovakia, a newly formed country after World War II. The country wanted to be recognized internationally with support from the League of Nations military and financially, lastly wanting a separate homeland for Jews as well. Negotiating peace among the other nations was easy as I got most of the important goals that I wanted such as recognition and support of self-determination from western countries (Redding, 2023). My main takeaway from this simulation was that making rules and agreements that everyone must agree on is hard as everyone wanted their own goals as well as the creation of the League of Nations to try to prevent future conflicts. This was the same as real life as many countries wanted their own goals taken care of, but Germany in the end had the most reparations that destroyed the country. Another way that the aftermath of World War I is demonstrated is through focus group update 2 which showed the state of Poland after World War I such as their bad economy and ongoing conflicts after the war. The takeaway I got from this is how many of the nations after the war were in a bad place which can lead to groups coming to power in a tough time. Many new countries such as Poland were not left in a good place after the war.
          	On the other hand, the outcomes of World War II were the split of Germany which we talked about in class (Redding, 2023). After the war was over, Germany was split into four sections based on the four major powers that occupied the country. This was different from World War I as they didn’t just have to pay reparations, but also had to be occupied. Another outcome of the war was the Nuremberg Trials that we learned about through the Streicher Trial simulation (Redding, 2023). My main takeaways from the simulation were how impactful and influential social constructs that are used through media can be in influencing a population in such a way that influenced German citizens to express anti-Semitism towards Jews in justifying their aggression. Overall, the takeaways that are important from these outcomes of the wars were the power of propaganda in shaping public opinion, the importance of cultural exchange as it promotes peace between nations and the dangers of nationalist which led to radical ideologies.
          	In conclusion, although World War I and World War II were both significant events in world history and involved major global powers, they were distinct conflicts with unique causes, natures, and outcomes. World War I was caused by cultural and diplomatic tensions while World War II was driven by Nazi Germany's aggressive expansionism and anti-Semitism. The nature of the two wars differed, with World War II characterized by using new technology and dehumanization of the enemy. The outcomes of the wars also varied, with the Treaty of Versailles and the creation of the League of Nations following World War I, and the split of Germany after World War II. Studying these wars and their differences through various lenses, including culture, totalitarianism, and social constructs, is crucial to understanding their impact and taking away lessons from them.

